I've been putting off making this video
because it's a really interesting
phenomena but I was never sure of the
explanation I think I've worked it out
now I'm not totally sure but I thought
I'll make the video anyway and then you
can decide in the comments what you
think about my explanation so I've got
this garden hose and the head is set to
power jet mode all the water's coming
out just a small hole in the front there
and just to demonstrate how powerful the
jet is I've got this plastic tray it's
made from the bottom of a hummus carton
and I can launch that into the air
what's really interesting is if I point
the whole thing downwards like this
you'd think with the extra help of
gravity would travel even faster away
from the jet what's this it sticks to it
you can move it around
[Music]
that's what I want to try and explain to
try and explain it I want to show you
what I think is the same effect but with
air instead of water and for this you
need a hairdryer and some polystyrene
and a second sheet of post I mean like
this if you're going to do this make
sure you've got a hairdryer where you
can turn the heating element down to
zero so you blow the air out I can feel
the jet of air pushing my hands down but
if I lift it up to a certain point it
gets sucked up
[Applause]
so there you go the poorest timing is
defying gravity as some people like to
say of course it's not it's just there's
some force counteracting gravity pushing
up let's see if we can figure out what
that force is think about the air
flowing out of the hairdryer it's being
forced to travel through the cavity
between the two layers of polystyrene
because of the air pressure produced by
the hairdryer which I'm going to assume
is fixed so I've created this animation
of the particles in the air this
animation is missing certain details
like it doesn't show any thermal energy
because the temperature of the air is
somewhere above absolute zero
it has some thermal energy so really
these particles in the air should be
bouncing around in all different
directions hitting each other and that
sort of thing so what you're really
seeing is the average smoothed out
motion of the particles ignoring thermal
motion I've created the animation in
such a way that the density of particles
is the same everywhere so if you look at
the density out here towards the edge
it's the same as the density towards the
middle that's because I'm assuming that
the pressure is the same everywhere and
if you want the pressure to be the same
everywhere you need the density of
particles to be the same everywhere and
you know this intuitively from playing
with an air filled syringe if you
compress the syringe you increase the
density of the particles inside but you
also increase the pressure you feel that
increased pressure as the syringe
pushing back against your hand but is it
right to assume that the pressure is the
same everywhere
probably not and actually we've
neglected to think about the velocity of
the gas particles because velocity
doesn't change like an object's velocity
will stay the same
unless that object is acted on by a
force like if an object is drifting
through space it will continue to drift
at a fixed velocity unless a force acts
upon it and that's true of the particles
in this gas as well and we're interested
in the sort of net velocity the outward
drift velocity of the particles as
opposed to the thermal velocity of the
particles so in my animation to keep the
density of the particles the same I've
had to slow them down as they travel
outwards but let's for a minute assume
that the particles aren't being acted on
by
force so they wouldn't slow down their
velocity would stay the same what would
it look like so here's a different
version of the animation where the
velocity of the particles don't change
and you can see how the density changes
as you move out from the center there's
just more space around the edges than in
the middle so there are fewer particles
to go around per unit volume the reality
is probably somewhere between the two
animations but the point is the density
of particles is going to go down
somewhat as the air streams outwards and
it seems like at least for the case of
the hair dryer and the polystyrene that
the drop in pressure is enough so is
that the difference in pressure between
the air inside the cavity and the air
underneath the cavity is great enough to
overcome the weight of the post I mean
pulling it down so just so you've got
the whole picture then you've got normal
atmospheric pressure underneath the post
I'm pushing it up you've got the
pressure inside the cavity pushing it
down but that's less than atmospheric
pressure and then you've got the weight
of the post own pulling it down and
they're all in balance so the post Dome
doesn't fall my theory is it's the same
principle of play with the water jet and
the humus tab which explains why you
can't get it to work with just the end
of a hose you need to have a small jet
embedded within a flat plate look like
we've got here and we have the same
thing with that power jet hose connector
that I was using a lot of people are
probably now shouting at the screen
Bernoulli it's just Bernoulli say
Bernoulli and I get that I like shouting
Bernoulli as well but I didn't use
Bernoulli to explain what was going on
here and the reason is like Bernoulli's
principle is a derived principle what I
mean by that is you can look at the
underlying principles of fluid dynamics
and you can derive this thing and you
can say look by rearranging all these
equations and stuff I can show that this
thing is always true this simple
relationship between pressure and
velocity is always true and that's
really useful if you're doing fluid
dynamics but it's I don't think it's
useful for giving someone a truly
intuitive understanding of what's going
on one last thing I want to show you
that's somewhat related but probably has
a slightly different explanation take a
hand blender like this one and a
container that is slightly larger than
the hand blender put some water in there
and turn it on
[Applause]
the effect is actually really strong
using these travel scales it looks as if
the pulling force is equivalent to the
weight of almost a kilogram under
gravity but is it the same effect as the
downwards jet of water maybe not
actually the blades of the hand blender
act like propellers they draw liquid
upwards so it's different in that way I
don't know I feel like it's got
something to do with surface tension as
well at least service tension would
certainly play a part probably does in
the the downwards water jet phenomena as
well anyway let me know what you think
in the comments
[Applause]
[Music]
I built those animations in JavaScript
and html5 canvas which is something I
didn't know how to do until I learnt
these days I really see the benefit of
taking online video classes and I'm
really happy that the sponsor of this
video is the best provider of video
classes that I've been able to find
which is Skillshare an online community
of learners that has thousands of
classes covering creative and
entrepreneurial skills you know in the
old days if I'd had a challenge like
this I would have tried to hack
something together with code I found
online and eventually I get it to work
but I wouldn't understand why or how but
this time I started by taking the get
creative with html5 canvas course on
Skillshare and yeah of course I still
Nick code online because that's how you
code but the process of getting that
code to do what I wanted it to do was
much quicker because I truly understood
how the coding works and that's what I
see as the benefit of online video
classes it's like an acceleration that
gets you to where you want to go quicker
and it's a speed boost that stays with
you like the next time I need to solve a
problem like this it will be quick again
because I still understand you might
also like their basics of web design
layout class or if animation is your
thing they have classes in other
technologies like After Effects it's
really affordable ten dollars a month
for an annual membership but because
they're sponsoring this video you can
get a two month free trial if you go to
school Dutch forward slash Steve Moll
three that's school Dutch forward slash
Steve mold three the link is also in the
description check it out today I hope
you enjoyed this video if you did don't
forget to hit subscribe and I'll see you
next time
[Music]